---
published: false
---

Agency is the player's sensation that they participate meaningfully in the game.

We believe, by default, that we have agency in our own lives. We inherently possess a feeling that we have power over our own bodies and minds in the real world and that the world will respond when we kick or hit or spit or talk. At the very least we'll feel our own body doing those things--we hope to see others react in some way, and to change what's going on around us with our actions in perceptible ways. 

This immediate sense of agency leads us to believe that we have agency in broader events, as well. Supersticions around luck or divine favor are a part of all cultures. People who hold these beliefs are believing they have agency over distant events which have no relation to them except perhaps in a minor detail. The human mind seems to seek and assumes agency wherever it can. With this cognitive backdrop you can see that agency in games should be a similarly complex topic.

In video and board game design, the game designer defines a world in which the players participate. Part of this definition includes places and times where players can intervene. As long as you can relate the player's intervention to the game's goal, you have shown that the player has some degree of agency. This is the simplest way of conceiving of agency.

From this we can derive a simple measure of agency: What's the difference in goal achievement rate betweeen a competent human player (or merely someone who knows the rules and can play in a goal-directed fashion) and some stand-in automated player who always chooses his actions at random? A stand-in definitively exhibits no will whatsoever, thus is cannot possibly have agency. So if we compare the result of random play with the result of goal-directed play, we should see the goal-directed play win signfiicantly more often if the player has agency in the game.

In a game where the player doesn't have many actions at a time, this model for agency may have some use. Checkers, for instance, allows so few possible moves in most board configurations that the stand-in could at least play a portion of the game in a way that could be mistaken for sensible. Later in the game, when there are more choices to be made, the stand-in will most definitely be dominated by a gaol-directed player, though. Unsurprisingly, you do have some agency when you play checkers.

But think, instead, about this kind of analysis applied to XCOM 2. There are so many possible actions the stand-in could take on any given turn, and so many of them don't make noticeable progress towards the mission's goal, that the chance of the stand-in succeeding at a mission is nearly 0%. Merely being cognizant of the goal of the game is enough to make your actions significantly better than chance at moving you towards a positive result.

What does this actually tell us? Not much, I think. Players express some non-negligible absolute quanitty of agency merely by making goal-directed decisions. The player in XCOM 2 is having a real impact on the result of a mission--even if they're playing erratically and naively they have a significantly better chance than if the system were played randomly.

But we don't think, when playing a game, of the absolute amount of agency we have. We may make a hundred small decisions over the course of an XCOM 2 mission, but we don't comment on the fact that we had a lot of agency in the 90 move actions--we comment on the 3 75% shots that our characters missed.

Players don't assess their agency continuously over the course of the game, taking into account all of their actions. they pick out salient points where their agency was denied. Agency, in the player's mind, is proved not by the accumulation of willful action, but in the important moments where the difference between success and failure wasn't a missed insight, but instead was a missed dice roll.

Games and players have far more going on than that, though. It's not just important that the player can do things related to the goal, they have to *feel* like their actions have a direct relationship with if they achieve their goal or not. There are all kinds of other game rules that can get in the way. 

The player's feeling of agency is fragile--if the game is too difficult they will give up and claim they never had a chance. A frustrated player can easily spiral downward into a feeling of powerlessness, as if they had no agency in what was happening and the game was just taking advantage of them. Usually this leads to tossing aside the game, regardless of how much absolute agency you can show by comparing the player's actions to those taken at random.

Games where the player feels a strong sense of agency eschew salient randomness. Randomness needs to have effects that are in the distance or future and the player can adjust to, instead of being highly salient, critical components of game play like miss chances or randomized damage.
The player feels they have agency when they have a chance to react.

Player's can also feel their agency is constrained by games where long run prediction is possible. Players don't want the game's result to feel pre-determined, even if it really was only determined by their actions. When the player feels like the game's set up against him and the pieces are just mechanistically moving him towards a specific conclusion, agency dissolves. It doesn't matter that the player had many choices with clear outcomes along the way. A great game keeps the player feeling like they have agency in the outcome for as long as possible, which means not only does the game system need to resist solution, it needs to signal clearly to the player that it is not solved and there's room for maneuver and eventual success.


* Agency is in the player's mind
    * People default to thinking they have agency in whatever they participate in. Evolutionary biology of the mind, etc.
    * Seeing your actions have an impact is holistic. Interface juiciness matters.
    * When learning a game you have diminished agency because you don't have the groundwork for understanding what's happening.
    * Agency is all about the player forming causal chains from their actions to goals they want to achieve.
* Meaningful participation
    * You can locate yourself in causal chains.
* We can approximate agency
    * Compare player's input to effects in the game world tha the player can see.
    * COmpare directly observable effects of player input against what the rest of the system is doing.
    * It comes down to tracing causal chains.

A player's sense of Agency is easily fooled. Figuring out how much agency you have is a learned skill which people generally find mixed emotional results from honing.

People come to an understanding of their level of agency in a situation with exposure to games. Games with no agency involved, like betting on dice rolls, or Shoots and Ladders, entertain children and some adults if there's money on the line.

Since agency is in the player's mind, even simple and unsophisticated games like Tic-Tac-Toe permit agency for children and adults who are unfamiliar. Agency is about generating the feeling of meaningful participation in shaping a game's outcomes, thus the individual player's knowledge of the game always plays an important part. Game designers needs to take this into account and try to rapidly get the player accustomed to the game enough that they can see the at least some of the causal patterns that inform decision-making and let the player make sense of the results of their input.

Player action needs to matter within the system and be a central aspect.

Let's tease apart the elements of agency:

1. You can try to achieve your interests through manipulating some points of contact in the game system.
	1. You may have an avatar in the game world to represent you.
    1. The game system may permit unintermediated interaction, as in Starcraft.
1. The game relays some feedback to you regarding the impact of your actions that you can interpret as relevant to what you've done and your interests.
	1. The feedback needs to be significant enough that you can establish causal relationships.

So first we have to look at if an individual piece of input is validated by the output the game presents. This means tracing the player's expectations and checking them against the possible results in the game next time his input is needed. Not only does the game need to show mechanical effects of the player's input, showing "juicy" graphical cues can also be important. Not many players are going to tease apart the analogical from the mechanical here--providing an interface that feels good to use can amplify systemic agency, or fill in, to a limited extent, for where systemic agency is lacking.

Strategy games where the player commands simulated people doing things, like shooting aliens, use randomness to simulate the impact of the skill of the simulated people. Often this leads to scenarios where the player gives a command, but in the game world the associated action is only performed partially or not performed at all. For instance, in XCOM you tell a unit to attack, but the attack misses. The only way that you know the game isn't ignoring your input is that an animation plays and the unit's ammo is decremented for the weapon it fired. Here we have the interface reassuring the player that their input mattered, even though the result of that input was a non-event.

When we talk about agency in game design, we use it to describe the subjective experience of the player being able to project her will onto the game’s systems. This implies that games must present a system, and that games must allow the manipulation of the system in some way by some kind of player. If a game has a system but fails to present it in a way that a player can recognize, agency becomes impossible. Agency is a trait of the player's experience, not the game itself. Agency requires a chance for player input in the context of the system and feedback that reflects that input. The feedback doesn't have to be unambiguous and the input doesn't have to be unambiguous. Without a chance for input, you don't have any capacity for the player to act (or play) so agency becomes impossible; without feedback that reflects input there's no indication that the player has taken an action, so the causation-finding circuitry in the brain can't find purchase and the player doesn't get a sense that they are interacting. This is all trivial for real-world sports, because there's no artifice providing a view into the game system–the game system is a layer of pretense atop the physical universe, free of simulation.

We can look at agency in games as if we are having a conversation with the game. If you are talking to someone about elephants but they seem to respond regardless of your message with some mathematical equations about the shape of bananas, you wouldn't recognize that as a conversation. You are saying one thing, and independent of what you said, the other conversant said something else. You may be able to contrive a relationship, but it's far from obvious and intuitive. The person you're talking to may wait for a gap in your exposition to insert his irrelevant statements, which may convince you that your opposite is aiming for conversation, but that still leaves us entirely unsure you're having a conversation. In a game, you provide some input to the game and the game shows you a continuous stream of output. If the output doesn't seem relevant to your input, the connection between you and the game is not obviously there, and you are left with the impression that your input is ignored, much as a conversant spouting random facts at random intervals is, at best, questionably participating in a conversation. Establishing this feedback loop of relevance and reaction allows the player or conversant to build a causal model of the game or conversation in her mind that will map her actions to certain kinds of results based on observable contingencies. When Mary talked to Paul about politics, Paul got very agitated, so now Mary has this relationship between Paul, politics, and agitation in her mind. She’ll remember this the next time she tries to have a conversation with Paul and potentially use it to inform her communication with him. When you're playing Call of Duty and you click the left mouse button in the course of normal play your character's weapon appears to fire and the object your reticle is on seems to react visibly and audibly as if it were shot–now you can draw a causal relationship between that input and the effect on the game world.

Humans can be overwhelmed with contingencies and be rendered unable to draw any causal links. Humans can also draw causal links based on special cases that clearly are not representative, then, due to cognitive biases, ignore or disregard feedback that would show these highly-contingent causal links to be incorrect
