---
published: false
---
## Analogy

Analogy is how the designer bridges the gap between the player and the abstract mechanics of the game. Analogy makes relatable and relevant what would otherwise be a litany of abstractions and seemingly arbitrary relationships. The player's [functional fixedness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_fixedness) bias makes her more likely to stick to the analogical use of game elements instead of constructing a game-specific model immediately, thus analogy is critical in both positive and negative player experiences.

Games and gameplay are often presented with expressive graphics representing familiar concepts that help the player learn how to play and quickly come to grips with the current state of the system. Even when games don’t try to model pieces of life with any accuracy, as in typical combat in a turn-based RPG combat system like Final Fantasy’s, there are myriad graphical symbols used to denote in-game concepts, and the player can more easily relate to the game because of them.

As with any art, knowing your audience is essential when you are designing a game. Picking certain analogies over others, then using the more meaningful terms and symbols that the player will understand, leads to rapid, effective communication from game to player. Good analogies draw the player in quickly, letting them buy into the game’s systems and fluently begin what will hopefully be a long and fruitful process of experimentation and learning.

Analogies can convey complex meaning quickly and neatly wrap up many rules in an easy to grok package. In a Civilization game, the tech tree and each individual technology the player can research rely on analogy to convey a relatively complex idea--that of the advancement of civilization granting great capacities to make money, war, and cultural artifacts. Civilization games present a much more limited subset of the implications of this broad idea, but even an unfamiliar player can, just through interpreting this analogy, quickly come to grips with enough of the rules of the system to get started using it. Modern Civilization games have thousands of rules behind the scenes that play into technological advancement, but the player can use the UI and their life experience to make educated guesses at the general form of most of those rules and they’ll gain a significant portion of the knowledge they need to make the decisions they want to make. Compare Civilization games’ rich analogical structure to Chess. Chess has very little rule complexity compared to Civilization, thus its analogical structure needs not be as strongly tied to its mechanics. “Rook”, for example, is not a word familiar to a modern player outside of the world of Chess, but there are so few rules attached to the name--merely two movement rules and castling--that this weak signifier doesn’t handicap the player. This is typical of abstract strategy games. Their rules are remarkably simple and they need to be since their design asthetic of being an analogical desert prevents them from sustaining much complexity without making the interpretational task of the players nigh insurmountable.

In short, analogy is the tool the designer uses to package the complex and intricate into a cognitively-friendly form. If a game is about some area of human experience in which a player already has interest, the game can share in the cognitive benefits of that interest. Analogy is incredibly important to making games feel relevant, and to making games playable in the first place. Thus analogy is one of the three foundational aspects of games that designers must keep in mind at all times.

## Analogy and the process of design.

Although I write about the design of games and have a love of seeing the mechanics stripped of their potentially-obfuscating metaphorical components, I must recognize that the way most games are designed is a process that starts with the analogy and works its way to the mechanics. Designers pick what kind of a game they want to make through reference to genre convention and personal experience. Design decisions are informed by some interesting interaction in the real world that the designer wants to model.

Game designers do not make analogical design decisions independently of the abstractions they are designing. Just as the players use a game’s analogies to relate to the game’s abstractions, the designer uses analogies as proxy concepts to more easily grasp the logical relationships that should exist between game pieces.

## Cliches and Game Symbology

“Why should this matter to me?” is a question seldom asked directly by someone who is viewing art, but lies at the root of the value of art. If a piece has no relevance to the observer--if the observer can gain no traction between his experience and content of the artwork--complaints and dismissal will likely follow. The relationship between art and observer is often, but need not be built of life experience outside of art. (Art can be self-referential, or largely valuable because of its relationship to other art.) Without understanding these relationships between symbols in art and their personal experience, the observer finds difficulty appreciating the art. Games have similar representational problems to solve, but they not only aim to produce a given kind of interpretation, they also test the player’s interpretation against the system itself. If the player cannot pass this test, the game prevents the player from progressing to other parts of the work. The twinning of testing the player’s skill and wishing for the player to progress through some significant part of the game requires games to hew closer to symbols and representations that players can interpret without particularly hard work or specialist knowledge. The fastest way to quickly symbolize certain kinds of game bits and relationships between game bits involves using a framework of cliches and established symbols.