---
published: false
---
In my [article on analogy](analogy.html) I looked at analogy as if it were a tool that a designer uses to communicate obtuse and otherwise bewildering abstract rules to normal game-playing people. In reality, though, strategy game design often starts with analogy and relies on it as a design technique throughout the development process. Designers pick what kind of a game they want to make through reference to genre convention and personal experience. Design decisions are informed by some interesting interaction in the real world that the designer wants to model.

Just as the players use a game's analogies to relate to the game's abstractions, the designer uses analogies as proxy concepts to more easily grasp the logical relationships that should exist between game pieces.

There are numerous analogical justifications for pretty bizarre game rules--the designer can use analogy in the style of post-hoc rationalization. Make rules that work systemically, come up with a reason why the game world would act like that. Want a Tactical RPG where characters don't die on the battlefield when their HP is reduced to 0? Gods, angels, and demons save the characters that gain their favor and whisk them back to home base, healing them along the way. And then, with the analogy established we've indirectly suggested more mechanics! Angels and demons are aligned with good and evil, and we can give characters alignments too. Then if they're faithful to their alignment in their actions in battle, they'll pay less of a cost for the between-battle healing. Now we have a new dimension of characters that we can tie into all kinds of other game systems.

This is quite a powerful method of brainstorming. The designer can chain practical mechanical decisions into analogical justification into its implications to suggest further mechanical additions and begin the loop anew. They can start this process from just about any bit of their game design and suggest wide-ranging changes that are only limited by the imagination and originality of the designer. This is a useful design technique, but it requires you start somewhere.

Most designers start with a prototypical copying approach. Take structural properties of other games that you liked and copy them, filling in the various extension points they naturally offer with different details. By using an anological chaining technique as I demonstrated above, you can break free of the broad strokes your starting point gives you and move into uncharted ground.

One entry point into uncharted ground is addressing mechanical weaknesses of existing games. I'll be working on many different  tools for understanding how to form mechanically solid game systems. Using these techniques in combination with analogical chaining will lead to some pretty strange and unique results that none-the-less have solid-feeling game worlds that are as unique and deeply interconnected as the systems that give them substance. I'm hoping to arrive at an approach to game design that offers a whole-game approach where analogy feeds on mechanical strength which feeds on analogy. 
